Good day to everyone.
Welcome to Power BI lunch and
learn for March 15th, 2023.
Let me know with the thumbs up if
you can hear me see my PowerPoints.
All right. And it's so satisfying
seeing all those thumbs pop up.
It's like being a rock star.
My name is Chad Tony.
I am a senior cloud solution architect.
I work for Microsoft,
but I am full-time assigned to the BA.
I help the power BI Bissell team.
With their.
Mostly administration of the power BI tenant.
I do some training and some
lunch and learns here and there.
I have over 12 years of data
and analytics experience.
10 years of that has been in healthcare.
I've worked at a hospital.
I've worked at a Blue Cross focused
mostly on power BI and analysis services.
A little bit of other stuff,
a little bit of reporting services,
a little bit of Tableau even.
I've been a BI manager and a
product manager for analytics.
I have five kids.
This picture is a couple years old.
It's time for a new family photo.
I've lost about.
40 to 50 pounds since then.
So it's definitely time.
A little bit about the power BI
team here at the VA thank you for
the applause. I appreciate that.
Carries our team lead.
I'm your platform support, along
with Lavanya who joined us recently.
I'm not going to read everyone's name.
Um, some of the updates? March 29th.
Our team will be collaborating
and hosting CDW Insights,
which is a day of.
Training and presentations.
We'll have a special guest
at 1:00 PM Eastern.
Talking about integration
of Power BI with Powerapps.
We teach monthly power BI fundamentals
course three times a month.
We do lunch and learns the
1st and 3rd Wednesdays.
We have a page where we keep
the recordings and the slides
of previous luncheon learns.
Let us know if you like.
Would like to be a guest speaker
if you've done something cool in
power BI or analysis services.
Umm. Let us know and we're always
looking for guest speakers.
The CDW NextGen Center of Excellence
team also has a bunch of trainings and
resources on their SharePoint page as well.
Today I wanted to talk to you about.
How to build your own scar star schema?
So power BI prefers that we model our
data in what's called a star schema
that has facts and dimension tables.
What are facts and dimensions?
Well, I'll, I'll tell you a lot of you
probably already know, but we'll go
over some of the ground definitions.
Facts are the activities that you're
measuring, and dimensions are the
things that you'll measure by.
So dimensions are typically what you
would put in your slicer and power BI.
Many times our data is already
modeled for us in a data warehouse,
so we might connect to SQL Server and.
One of those really cool DBA's has already
created facts and dimensions for us.
That's one of the best ways
to have your data modeled.
And if you have your data in a SQL
data warehouse, that's awesome.
If you don't have it modeled in in SQL,
you could do it yourself,
or you could ask a DBA to do it for you and.
That's a great way for power
BI to get its data,
but sometimes we don't have that.
Sometimes you're working with
raw data from a SharePoint list
or from Excel or from a CSV,
and you don't have the ability
to model your data at the source.
You can still do it in power BI,
and that's what we're going
to talk about today.
In order to model your data in
power BI, understanding how facts
and dimensions work is vital.
So a fact is a type of table
that shows an activity.
It shows that something has happened.
It could be a sale of a
product to a customer.
It could be cash withdrawal from an ATM.
It could be a signature on an order,
or it could be a list of prescriptions,
medical treatments and counters.
It's the activity that happens often,
and it's always getting added to,
added to as the activities happen.
Dimensions, on the other hand,
are something that describes a fact.
It's an attribute of a fact.
So you your sale could be your
fact and your dimension could be
your customer or your product
or your name of your patient.
If your fact is cash withdrawals,
the currency, the type of
currency could be the dimension.
Your fact table is
typically your largest one.
If you have billions of sales,
those will be in your fact table.
It's unlikely that you have
billions of customers,
so your dimensions will be generally
smaller than your fact table.
Your fact tables are the ones
that are associated with numbers.
It has your amounts.
It has your sales,
it has your orders,
it has the quantity of product sold.
Not all numbers belong to facts,
but most of them do.
So if you're counting your customers
or you're counting your products,
those will be counting the dimensions.
But your typical aggregation of
numbers comes from the fact table.
Your fact tables are usually
you're really long, skinny tables,
and your dimensions are your smaller tables,
but they're wider because they have
lots of descriptions of the thing.
So if you have a million rows in your
dimensions, that's a really large number.
Dimensions also contain a lot of strings.
They would have the customer name,
the address, the gender, education, e-mail.
You may even have pictures in some of them.
Product dimension would have the
product color and the size and
the brand and the manufacturer.
You can. You can.
You can see it would be a
wide table with wide fields.
You you typically slice by your dimensions.
If you're doing any kind of
measures on your dimensions,
those are usually going to be
your counts, so like a number of
customers or a number of products.
When you're building a star schema,
you want your dimension to
generally be a business entity.
Is 1 table, and you want all the attributes
of that entity on the same table.
So your customer is a business entity.
You want a customer dimension with
all its attributes on that table.
Country on the other hand is usually
not its own business entity,
it's part of other dimensions.
So a customer would have a country
and a store would have a country,
but that country field
would be on each dimension.
So the the country field would be on
the customer dimension and the country
field could be on the store dimension.
So star schemas.
Power BI likes them.
Your data warehouse likes them.
How do we make one?
We have to start thinking of our data.
As separate business entities,
our fact table stands alone in
the center and our dimensions.
Form themselves around the fact
table and are directly linked to it.
This figure, when we see it
pictured looks like a star,
so we call it a star schema.
So if you think of your tables in a diagram.
You have your fact in the center,
which is sales in this case.
And then our dimensions product,
promotion, customer, date and store.
They're each related to the
fact table in the center,
and it kind of looks like a star.
Star schemas are pretty intuitive
to understand at first glance.
You can slice by the dimensions
and you can aggregate the facts.
They're very fast for modern data engines.
They drive a clean modeling path,
so numbers go in the fact
strings go in the dimension.
And both us and our users can understand
what the data is just by looking at it.
In general, dimensions should
not refer to each other.
Because Power BI will get
confused about what path it
should take when trying to slice.
So if you look at this one.
We have. You can't see it because it's
covered up by the yellow box, but.
Continent is being referenced
both to customer and to store.
When really we should move that to
the customer and store dimensions?
For each one like this.
So the data is duplicated,
but the overall model is much simpler to use.
So now we have location data
for the customer and location
data from the for the store.
Jim asked. No snowflakes, no.
We want to try to avoid snowflakes.
So if we can move everything
onto 1 dimension for one entity,
it will be less confusing.
Just some general rules of thumb.
If you start getting 20 or 30 dimensions,
you're probably getting way too high and
you need to consolidate your dimensions.
Sometimes we need to have multiple
fact tables. For example,
for in this example, we have orders
and shipments in one fact table.
In order to do calculations on
this fact table, it's going to get,
we're going to have to use
some really complicated DAX.
So if we wanted to compute like how
many orders were not shipped yet.
It's going to get complicated and messy.
Instead, what we would do to model this
data is create two different facts,
orders and shipments.
All right, let's go over to Power BI and
I will give you an example of how we can
create a star schema. From a flat file.
Before I do that. We have any questions?
About facts and dimensions.
See any questions yet? They pop up.
I'll try to address them.
Like I said before,
if you have a dimensional model,
if you already have facts and dimensions
provided for you in a data warehouse,
you're good to go. If you don't,
if you're connecting to excel or
connecting to a flat file like a
CSV or maybe a SharePoint list.
You can still create a
star schema in power BI.
And that's what I'm going to do here.
So I'm going to get some data and
I'm going to go to a tech CSV file.
And I'm going to connect
to this sales file here.
I get a preview and I know already
I want to transform this data
before I load it into power BI.
So I'm going to click transform data.
OK. I can see I have 108 columns.
I've got a lot of stuff here.
Hey Chad. Yeah,
power query is not showing.
It's still the desktop.
Oh, it doesn't switch the.
Window screen OK, hold on.
I'll just share my whole screen.
There we go.
Alright, so I'm into power query now.
Thank you for pointing that out.
I've connected to my file and
I can see it has 108 columns.
Got a lot of stuff.
And we don't like to pull in lots of
stuff that we don't need into power BI.
We only want to pull in what we do need.
I also am already starting to think where's
my facts and where's my dimensions?
I see I have a lot of keys here.
And I see I have some order quantities.
And sales amount. OK, that looks good.
That looks like something I
might want to keep in my fact.
It's something I can measure.
And I'm also going to want some of
these keys in my facts so I can
later join them to a dimension.
So I had a product key and customer key.
So let's.
Start by keeping some columns
and removing other columns.
One of my favorite buttons in Power BI.
Is remove other columns.
I'm going to select.
Product key. And sales territory key.
And let's select sales amounts as well.
I'm gonna right click.
And remove other columns.
The reason I love remove other columns.
Is because my brain can now relax.
And look at just these three fields.
I don't have to look at all that other junk.
Also I can click on this gear
on the right on remove other
columns and my applied steps.
And now that my brain is relaxed,
I can look at all these
other columns and decide,
do I really need any of these?
I can also start typing in the name.
Border Daiki I'm going to want to date.
Let's bring in order quantity.
Discount amount.
Freight.
I'm going to click OK.
OK, now I have something
that could look like a fact.
But what about my dimensions?
I want to bring those in too.
Since I only have one source file,
I'm going to connect to it multiple
times with multiple queries and
bring in different sets of data.
So I'm going to use this first query
and this is going to be my fact query.
I'm going to call it sales orders.
I'm going to right click on
that query go to duplicate.
I'm going to right click on it
again and duplicate it again.
Now I'm going to filter my columns
on these other queries to only
bring in dimension dimensional data.
So for my second query I'm
going to rename it product.
And then I'm going to change which
columns I'm bringing in for product.
So I'm going to click on the
gear on remove other columns.
And instead of all these fact type columns,
I'm just going to bring in some
product columns and I'm just going
to type in product right here.
And I know I'm going to want the product
key so I can build a relationship later.
And let's see what else do I want.
Want to actually look at my data.
Instead of just the column numbers.
Have an English product
name that looks helpful?
Have a color.
That looks helpful. Product Line,
English description and model name.
So I'm going to delete this step,
removed other column step.
And now I'm going to do it
just by selecting here.
So I'm going to select product key.
Control select English product name.
Size.
Product line.
Model name English description.
And I'm going to right click and
remove other columns. All right,
now I have my product dimension fields
that I want for my dimension table.
The thing about dimensions are
we want each value to be unique.
And because this is coming from a flat file,
we have a lot of duplication.
If we sort our product key ascending,
we can see that.
Product Key 344 is duplicating.
You know what, 10 times or something?
9 or 10 times.
We don't want that in our dimension
because then it won't join properly later.
So I'm going to delete this sorted rows step.
I'm going to select all the columns.
Right click and remove duplicates.
Now I have. 34 product keys, no duplications.
And I have the start of a product
dimension that I can load into power BI.
So let's leave our product dimension
and go to our next dimension.
So we're going to go down to the next
query here that we made sales orders 3.
And we're going to call this one.
Territories or territory?
And I'm going to click on the
gear for removing other columns.
Remove all these other
ones that we used before.
And let's see if we have other
ones with territory in the name.
Yeah, we do. Region, country and group.
Those look like the columns
that I want from my data,
so now I'm going to remove duplicates.
I now have a key and territory
information for my territory dimension.
I can now close and apply.
And Power BI will load this data as
three distinct tables into my model.
If I go to my model view on the left.
I can see that is already
made relationships.
Between my facts and dimensions,
because it knows.
That the keys match.
Data type and name.
And so now we have our sales
order fact in the middle.
And our dimensions are related
to it in a star schema,
product and territory.
I want to create another dimension.
Based on order date.
And in order to do that.
I want to change this order
date key to date field
so I'm going to go back.
And edit this query.
If you have a order date key, that's.
In the format of a number.
If you see here,
it's formatted like a number.
We need to transform that.
I want to transform that into a date.
So I'm going to format it first as text.
I'll show you why.
If I don't format it first as text,
it'll give me an error.
So if I try to just format it.
As date right now. It gives me
an error. I have to do 2 steps.
So I'm gonna format it as text first.
And then format it as date.
I don't want to replace the current,
I want to add a new step.
Now my order date key is actually.
Order date. That we rename
that one. Close and apply.
I now want to make a date dimension.
And I'll do that by going to
the data view. New table.
Making a date table.
Going to use the calendar auto function.
Which looks for a field in my
model that is a date. And creates.
Oops, I'm not ready to return yet.
I need to return my variable.
It basically looks at the date
range of my model and creates
a calendar table for it.
But I would like some additional
columns on that calendar table,
so I'm going to add.
The function add columns.
To my calendar.
And here is where you name the columns
and give an expression for each column.
Going to do the year.
And we'll do a month sort.
And month name.
Want to format this as a standard date here.
And I want it to look like that.
Now I'm going to drag my order
date over to date. You can't drag.
Want a new relationship?
There we go.
Now we have a star schema.
Based on a flat file.
Because we pulled in. Three separate
queries based on the same file.
Any questions about what we did there?
Everyone already an expert in this?
Now what I wanted to do with
this session was show you a
couple more real world examples.
Of how to do this in power BI
with real world data. Umm.
Every sample data set I could
find was not like wide enough to
really show you how to do this,
but I know that people on this call.
I have struggled with this
kind of thing before,
so I wanted to put it out there
as an option if someone is
struggling to create facts and
dimensions off your data set.
To let me know and I'll be happy to meet
with you and help you puzzle it out.
And then we could maybe use it as an
example in a future lunch and learn
of how to create facts and dimensions.
From a a very flat file or a very flat table.
So my e-mail is chad.tony@va.gov.
If you'd like some help creating a
star schema, please let me know.
I'd be happy to meet with you and go over it.
This type of modeling is covered in
our advanced modeling if you want to
learn more about facts and dimensions
and how they work in power BI.
Monthly on the 4th Monday,
we host an advanced modeling class that
is available to sign up for in TMS.
Bill has also done lunch and learn
data model sessions. Four of them.
Which are available in the lunch
and learn um. SharePoint list.
Martin asked is advanced
modeling covers surrogate keys.
Uh, I don't think it covers
like how to create them.
But we do talk about keys.
Jason, Advanced Modeling is not
an invite. It's like a class that
you sign up for through TMS.
And it's the same like we do
the same material every time.
For advanced modeling,
it's like a classy take.
But yes, if you have an
advanced modeling question,
that's not covered in the class.
Feel free to let us know.
It would be a great subject matter
for a future future lunch and learned.
I am. I put this together fairly
last minute, so I will try to
get it uploaded onto my GitHub.
So if you're interested in the
source file and the PBX file,
I'll have that available as well.
George asked how do you create
a date table for future dates?
Uh, you can? I think it's a.
It's an option in that function,
I believe. You can parameterize it,
or you can put it out into the future.
I'd have to look into it, but.
Pretty sure that's possible.
So instead of doing like calendar auto.
Open and close paren.
I think you like actually put some.
Values into the expression.
You can also create date
dimensions in power query.
That's an option too.
But yeah, thank you for attending this
lunch and learn. That's all I've got.
Have a good day everyone.